#The Slave of Portus: Paradata Document (Group B)

_this world looks best when used in conjunction with [Romecraft](http://romecraft.proboards.com/page/Textures)_
	
The Slave of Portus is the name of our Minecraft game, an immersive experience set in the Roman port city of Portus at the mouth of the Tiber River on the west coast of Italy. As a central port to the city of Rome during the 1st century CE, Portus saw a great deal of trade traffic which included slaves (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portus).(1)  Our game is meant to recreate the experience of a slave arriving at Portus where they are bought and then put to work by their new master doing various tasks around the city. In essence, we hope to illustrate the everyday life of a labour slave at this time. 

Because slaves were usually war captives(2),  the player arrives in Portus via a ship as if they have been brought from some distant land Rome invaded. There they are sent to the slave market to be sold after which they must travel to their new master’s house (Gaius Falco) who happens to be a wealthy merchant. At this point, the master orders the player to travel around the city completing various tasks that require manual labour, such as carrying resources from one area to another, repairing damaged structures, building a bathhouse and working in the mines. They will be unable to have the freedom of roaming the city, which gives the gameplay a similar feel to being an actual Roman slave. These kinds of tasks were characteristic of a labour slave, one of four broad categories of slave who was usually uneducated and illiterate yet fit enough to carry out physical tasks.  The other three types of slaves were meant to fulfill other duties based on their level of education, martial prowess or physical deformities (entertainment)(3).  Since construction and destruction are intrinsic to Minecraft we thought that casting the player as a labour slave would be the best way in which to transmit a somewhat historically representative experience. Thus, the game follows a chronological set of labour tasks spread out all over the city for which there are signs denoting various locations relevant to the game’s path. We designed this path to make with walls that cannot be jumped over and reinforced buildings with obsidian walls (unbreakable without a diamond pickaxe) in order to frustrate escape attempts and convey the experience of Roman slaves who were essentially trapped and imprisoned within Roman society.(4)  While there are possible points of escape for the player, it is arduous to do so since they are not given any tools (not until later in the game anyway) to break the barriers. Even if they do escape, the land outside the city is relatively barren and difficult to traverse which makes remaining in the city the only viable option for survival. In order to attempt to make the game as historically accurate as possible we had to limit the player. All slaves who had masters (like the player within the game) were not considered people back in ancient Roman times.(5)  Creating the game so that it becomes so limiting to the player, actually frustrated us, but we managed to limit the player within most of the game.  

The way in which we formatted the game, allows for an example of the non-linear perspective of history described by Fugo, which is that history should be layered, in order to receive the full scope of the time.(6)  The format of the game allows this non-linear perspective to emerge because there is not only one straight forward path on how to play the game of a slave, but you also get to see the perspectives, and day to day life of other characters of society. In order to get the whole experience of a society, in a digital format, there needs to be a combination of ‘showing and telling’. Showing is essential because it gives the player a sense of place, and a visual that is important to the game. Telling is also essential because it gives the player context, and a goal that will keep their attention locked in. As written by Daniel Reynolds in playing with the past, "These clues to the ancient history of the game environment encourage us to wonder about the nature of the world in which we find ourselves and to hypothesize about the processes that have shaped it. in other words, they cue historical thinking", this game encourages the player to consider the life of the slave from multiple perspectives, a topic that is not widely talked about, as well as the experience of being submerged in a Romanesque society. To us this constitutes good history.(7) 

Our final build resembles Portus, at the earliest time we could acquire data from, to give us a sense of what it looked like. We used an older map of Portus, in world painter, to ensure better accuracy of the city. (SG edit: they have, in fact, represented virtually a virtual representation of the 17th century understanding of the site!) Another aspect of the build is that we found a software that allowed us to copy and paste buildings which sped up the production process.

1.  Campbell, Brian. The Romans and Their World. London: Yale University Press, 2011. 52.
2.  “Slavery in the Roman Empire,” Last modified August, 2014, http://spartacus-educational.com/ROMslaves.htm.
3.  “Day in the Life of a Slave,” Last modified 2014, http://www.tribunesandtriumphs.org/roman-life/day-in-the-life-of-a-slave.htm.
4.   Campbell, The Romans and Their World. 52.
5.  Buckland, The Roman Law of Slavery. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1908. 3.
6.  Claudio Fugo, Digitalizing Historical Concisousness. History and Theory, Theme Issue 47. Weslayan University, 2009. 
7.  Daniel Reynolds. Playing with the Past: Digital Games and the Simulation of History.  Bloomsbury Publishing. Kindle Edition. 2013
